hello this is chef john from food wishes
calm with irish shepherd's pie irish
because we're using Irish cheddar we're
using the authentic lamb and when it's
gone you're gonna say to yourself I wish
I had more alright to get started we're
gonna put a little bit of olive oil and
butter in a Dutch oven on medium heat I
got to throw in a diced onion and lamb a
couple pounds of ground lamb shepherd's
pie is made with lamb not beef
all right Shepherds raised sheep not
cows so when you make a shepherd's pie
with beef you call it a cottage pie that
makes no sense alright and you want to
take a wooden spoon and while that cooks
you want to break it up nice and small
there should be a lot of liquid that
comes out a lot of water don't worry
that's going to evaporate and eventually
you'll start hearing it sizzle and it
will start to brown and nicely ideally
it leaves you a nice brown fond on the
bottom of the pan alright when it gets
to that point which took me about 10
minutes or so I'm gonna add a nice big
spoon of flour that's going to make that
beautiful thick gravy that holds all
this together
we're going to cook that flour for just
about three or four minutes and while
we're cooking the raw edge off that
flour let's go ahead and add our
seasoning we're gonna go with salt and
pepper some fresh rosemary a little bit
of paprika a little touch of cinnamon
some ketchup which I hear people in
Europe love and some fresh minced garlic
we're going to stir that in and I know
some that's not classic classic
shepherd's pie but you know what the
Irish are very experimental people and I
think they would approve so by the time
we added our seasoning and stirred it in
the flour has been cooking long enough
and we're going to add our liquid I'm
adding water now you can add chicken
broth you can add beef broth but lamb is
a pretty strongly flavored meat so it
really doesn't add a whole heck of a lot
all right we're going to give it a stir
it's going to thicken up very quickly
because we used a good amount of flour
and we're just going to cook this for
about five or six minutes until it
really thickens up nice I mean really
thick it should look something like that
at that point you can turn off the heat
and it's time to add the vegetables
which are peas and carrots now since
we're using frozen peas
I'm going to be nice and lets you use
frozen carrots they come with the frozen
peas in the same bag as soon as the
vegetables are stirred in we're going to
transfer this into your casserole dish
any kind of large baking dish will work
I believe this is nine by thirteen
you're going to spread it out and you're
going to tap it down
not the old tap a tappa we're going to
use the spatula and just smooth it out
all right so that's all set we're going
to set that aside until our potato crust
is ready which is made from potatoes the
most Irish of all ingredients by the way
indigenous to America you're welcome
Ireland I think you've more than made up
for it by sending us all those policemen
all right so we're going to boil a
couple pounds of potatoes I'm using
Yukon Gold I think they make a beautiful
cross nice color nice texture so we're
going to boil those in salted water
until tender we're gonna drain them
thoroughly all right toss in some butter
some cayenne some salt of course some
cream cheese and some Irish cheddar I
want you to go to one of the big
supermarkets and try to find Irish
cheddar it's really really good I'm
using one called Dubliner which is not
that hard to find if you can't find
Irish cheddar any kind of sharp white
cheddar will work alright we're going to
take a potato masher and mash all that
together and when that's thoroughly
incorporated I'm going to also add one
egg yolk that I'm going to beat with a
couple tablespoons of milk I want to
pour that in stir it in when that's all
mixed in go ahead and top your meat but
here's how you're going to want to do it
place big spoonfuls on top don't just
dump it on top because you don't want to
mix the filling the meat mixture into
the crust so I like to put dollops all
over the top then take a fork and even
it all out now there's lots of ways you
can do this you can leave it really
rough and rugged very similar to the
terrain of the Irish Shepherd or you can
take a fork and make one of these kind
of crosshatch designs I think that looks
pretty cool
or if you're insane like me you can
spend 15 minutes mimicking the pattern
on the wool sweaters worn by the
shepherds all right once the topping is
done we're going to put that in a 375
degree oven for about 25-30 minutes what
you're looking for is this a beautiful
crust you're going to see that gravy
bubbling around the outside and if
or something like this you gotta let sit
at least fifteen minutes but you know
what I didn't wait I'm gonna admit it
right now
the Sun was going down and I wanted to
get the final money shots so I just said
I'm going in with the spatula but you
know what it worked everything was fine
in fact more than fine just amazing
there's nothing better than a well-made
shepherd's pie that slightly gamy a
beautifully flavored lamb the vegetables
that thick rich gravy and then the Irish
cheddar in the potatoes on the top so
perfect it would be a great change of
pace to that corned beef and cabbage for
st. Patrick's Day or have both even
better so there you go
Irish shepherd's pie I hope you give
this a try head over to food wishes calm
for all the ingredient amounts and more
information as usual and as always enjoy